As all eyes on the Middle East remain
fixated on the war between Iran and the
United States and Israel, the stage is
quietly being set behind the scenes for
the next great era of conflict in the
region that over the long run will be
far more consequential than this current
war and which will determine the course
of Middle Eastern history for the next
decade to come. The emerging Cold War
between the Arab world's two greatest
and wealthiest powers, Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates. In many ways,
the evidence of this newly emerging Cold
War between them is already visibly
apparent. In late December of 2025,
Saudi warplanes directly bombed a UAE
weapons shipment in Yemen that was bound
for UAE-backed separatists in the
country. While Saudi and Emirati-backed
forces in the country openly battled
against each other on the ground.
Vicious insults were hurled at each
other across social media, with Emiratis
accusing the Saudis of bullying their
smaller neighbor and supporting
political Islam, and the Saudis blasting
the Emiratis as being anti-Islamic, too
pro-Israel, and fueling chaos across the
Middle East by supporting separatists.
But the emerging Cold War between them
extends far beyond Yemen across the
greater Middle East and surrounding
regions. They support radically
different sides in the brutal ongoing
civil war in Sudan that is fueling one
of the world's deadliest genocides. They
support different sides in the looming
war in the Horn of Africa, with the UAE
backing Abiy Ahmed's government in
Ethiopia and the breakaway state of
Somaliland, and Saudi Arabia backing the
Eritrean and Somalian governments
instead. They dramatically diverge on
their position relating to Israel, with
the UAE recognizing and allying with
Israel despite the unresolved
Palestinian issue, and Saudi Arabia
refusing to do so.
>> [music]
>> They are increasingly bitter economic
rivals, with Saudi Arabia's goals to
diversify away from oil into the
tourism, airline, finance, and AI
sectors directly encroaching on the
UAE's regional leads in these industries
that they achieved during their own
drive to diversify away from oil
earlier. And while they used to work
together under the logic of a more
threatening mutual enemy in the form of
the Islamic Republic of Iran that
challenged them both. That historic
logic is eroding away the weaker that
Iran becomes through its punishing wars
with Israel and the United States. With
their historical mutual enemy becoming
increasingly removed from the board in
the Middle East, the otherwise natural
rivalry between Saudi Arabia and the UAE
that has festered [music] just beneath
the surface for years is increasingly
erupting out into the open and it will
shortly become the dominant geopolitical
force that drives whatever happens in
the Middle East next for the following
decade. And all of this may come as
rather surprising to you since just last
decade across the 2010s, Saudi Arabia
and the UAE maintained closely aligned
foreign policies with one another and
were generally seen as solid, reliable
allies. Both countries were wary of the
staunchly anti-monarchist Islamic
Revolution in Iran's threats to their
monarchies and viewed Iran's support for
proxies across the Middle East as their
shared top existential threat followed
by the pro-democracy and Sunni
anti-monarchist movements that swept
across the region during and after the
Arab Spring movement as well. The royal
families in both countries were
primarily concerned about maintaining
their positions of power and the status
quo against these external
anti-monarchist threats across the
2010s. Both sought the protection of the
United States to defend them against
these threats and they did not yet see
each other as direct competitors. Much
of their friendliness during this
earlier era was also built upon the
personally cordial relationship between
their de facto leaders, Mohammed bin
Zayed or MBZ in the UAE and Mohammed bin
Salman or MBS in Saudi Arabia. By the
circumstances of geography, the UAE
found itself in the unenviable position
of being a much smaller country wedged
in between two larger giants, Iran and
Saudi Arabia.
After MBZ rose to power in the UAE in
2014, he began pursuing an aggressive
foreign policy that was determined to
elevate his country's relative position
and which prioritized building a
coalition with the Saudis against the
Iranians after he had deftly identified
that the Saudi kingdom was at that very
moment in the midst of a succession
crisis that his smaller nation had a
once-in-a-generation opportunity to
influence and benefit [music] from. By
that point, Saudi Arabia had been
continually ruled by the many aging
children of the kingdom's original
founder, Ibn Saud, for the past 60-plus
years. In 2015, Ibn Saud's 25th son,
Salman, became king at the youthful age
of 79, which directly led to an internal
power struggle amongst the younger
members of the Saudi royal family to
become the true power standing behind
the throne. Early on in this power
struggle, MBZ identified a young and
ambitious MBS as his favorite candidate
and began providing his support and
backing, hyping him up through lobbying
to the Americans, the Saudis, and other
Westerners and solidify his credibility
in the process. The hard work ultimately
[music] paid off and despite MBS only
being King Salman's seventh son, MBS was
appointed as Saudi Arabia's defense
minister in early 2015 at the age of
just 29 years old. And a few months
later, he was appointed as deputy crown
[music] prince, positioning him to
control the levers of power in the
country thanks to the direct
intervention of MBZ and the UAE. And
with that, the UAE was able to utilize
the far more powerful Saudi Arabia as
effectively a force multiplier of their
own ambitions. For years afterwards, the
personal relationship between MBZ and
MBS blossomed.
>> [music]
>> At 24 years his senior, MBZ reportedly
saw a younger version of himself in MBS,
a man willing to take risks, someone who
understood the radical transformations
that were necessary for their countries
to survive in a post-oil future, and
most importantly of all, a man willing
to get his hands dirty [music] to do
what was necessary for survival. A sort
of mentor-mentee relationship is
reported to have developed between them,
and the two men pursued closely aligned
aggressive foreign policies against
their shared enemies and in support of
their shared allies and backers.
>> [music]
>> Saudi Arabia, which had been effectively
a sleeping giant ruled by cautious old
men for generations, suddenly
transformed into a revisionist power
like the UAE was under their much
younger, new, ambitious leadership.
MBS and MBZ sent troops together into
Yemen in 2015 to intervene against the
Iranian-backed Houthis in the country.
And then both men led their countries
into the blockade of their neighbor
Qatar in 2017
in an attempt to pressure them into
distancing from Iran, shutting down Al
Jazeera, and ending their alleged
support for the Muslim Brotherhood, a
transnational Sunni Islamist faction
that advocates for a form of political
Islam that's generally deemed to be
anti-monarchist
and therefore deemed a threat to the
Emirati and Saudi royal families. MBS
also boldly ordered the kidnapping of
Lebanon's prime minister in 2017 and
referred to Iran's supreme leader
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei as the new
Hitler.
But then, starting in 2018, the first
signs of divergence between Saudi Arabia
and the UAE and between MBS and MBZ
personally began emerging that would
eventually build up into their current
full-on cold war.
The war in Yemen against the
Iranian-backed Houthis had transformed
into a visible quagmire for the Saudis.
The deaths of hundreds of thousands of
people in Yemen being caused by Saudi
Arabia's intervention using
American-made weapons generated
substantial international criticism,
which culminated with the Biden
administration suspending US sales of
offensive weapons to the Saudis almost
immediately after Biden took office in
January of 2021.
Meanwhile, Houthi missiles and drones
began bombing Saudi cities and critical
oil infrastructure back in retaliation.
The first time that Saudi territory was
directly attacked by a foreign power
since the Dammam did so back during the
1991 Gulf War. While Riyadh and Abu
Dhabi's objectives in Yemen also
gradually diverged apart from each
other. Saudi Arabia primarily focused on
maintaining security along their borders
with Yemen, stopping the Houthi drone
and missile attacks on their cities,
ending the damage being done to their
international reputation by the war, and
keeping Iranian influence at bay. And
they came to see that the best way of
doing that was by reunifying Yemen under
an internationally recognized central
government where all sides, including
the Houthis, shared in power. Meanwhile,
the UAE, who was being attacked far less
frequently by the Houthis and who was
also suffering far less political
fallout from the intervention, decided
to consolidate their expanding influence
[music] in Yemen by backing the
separatist STC faction who wanted to
secede and recreate the former state of
South Yemen. And in the process, their
influence over the critical Bab
el-Mandeb strait at the southern end of
the Red Sea. As a result, the UAE ended
up securing its influence over a
separatist southern state in Yemen.
While the Saudis largely got left behind
holding the bag, bogged down in an
unwinnable and politically ruinous war
in the north against the Houthis. And
then, of course, came the killing and
dismemberment of the Washington Post
columnist Jamal Khashoggi within the
Saudi consulate in Istanbul in 2018,
which the CIA quickly concluded had been
personally ordered by MBS himself.
All of these aggressive actions and
controversies turned MBS into something
of a pariah in the Western world, which
dramatically impacted Saudi Arabia's
ability to attract the foreign investors
and capital that they needed to
diversify away from oil into other
industries like tourism and finance. To
say nothing of the Houthi missiles and
drones that were sometimes bombarding
Saudi cities. Perhaps most symbolically
of all, in March of 2022, Houthi
missiles and drones slammed into a Saudi
oil depot and blew it up on the
outskirts of the city of Jeddah, just 11
km away from where the Formula 1 Saudi
Grand Prix was actively being hosted at
at the time, leading to black smoke
being visible from the attack directly
from the circuit, and probably no doubt
influencing drivers, fans, and worst of
all, investors' willingness to consider
returning again.
All of this meant 2021 and 2022, MBS and
Saudi Arabia decided to abandon their
previously aggressive foreign policy
that had worked in tandem with the UAE
since 2015, but it generated for them
significant instability and blowback.
And they reverted back to focusing on
building up stability, calm, and
predictability at home instead to create
the environment that they needed to
attract all the foreign investment that
they required for their Vision 2030
program. MBS's grand idea to diversify
the Saudi kingdom away from oil into the
tourism, airline business, and finance
industries. A vision that would never be
successful with investors fearful of
parting their money in projects in a
country where they could realistically
get blown up in smoke. This shift away
from the more aggressive policies of the
2010s meant burying the hatchet and
improving the relations with their
enemies. Saudi Arabia ended their failed
blockade of Qatar in 2021 after having
achieved zero of their objectives there.
Qatar maintained relations with Iran,
never shut down Al Jazeera, and
continued funding Islamist groups across
the region. After Russia invaded Ukraine
in 2022, the West sheepishly ended MBS's
pariah status by welcoming him back into
the fold in order to maintain access to
the Saudi oil fields. In 2023, China
helped mediate a restoration in
relations between Saudi Arabia and Iran.
While the Saudis also worked hard to
reconcile the relations with Turkey as
well. They stopped their air strikes in
Yemen, completely abandoned their
campaign to permanently remove the
Houthis there, and began lobbying for
all sides in the war to de-escalate and
to form a unity government in Yemen
under a power-sharing agreement instead.
Whatever it took to stop the Houthis
from shooting back at them. Meanwhile,
without yet suffering any substantial
blowback themselves, and with an economy
that was already highly diversified away
from oil, the UAE, under the leadership
of MBZ, has basically just continued
maintaining their same aggressive
foreign policy from the 2010s into the
2020s against their perceived threats
and to project geopolitical power
opportunistically,
which has increasingly come to be viewed
as running against Saudi Arabia's
current interests by NBS. Unlike the
Saudis, who began trying to keep
countries in the region together in the
2020s in the name of stability, the
Emiratis, more often than not, came to
support an increasingly large array of
separatists in their drive to expand
their own influence. In addition to
carving out their influence in South
Yemen with the Southern Separatist
Project, the Emiratis also began backing
the Somaliland's secessionist project on
the other side of the Red Sea in
Somalia, developing a new port there at
Berbera and quietly accepting Somaliland
passports, effectively recognizing
Somaliland's independence in everything
but name. Further up the Red Sea in
Sudan, after the civil war exploded
there in 2023, Saudi Arabia and Egypt
backed the military government in the
Sudanese Armed Forces, while the UAE
immediately backed the rebel Rapid
Support Forces instead, because they
viewed the government as having too many
political Islamists from the old Omar
al-Bashir regime, who were still within
their ranks. In Libya, they began
supporting the authoritarian
Generalissimo Khalifa Haftar in the east
against the more Islamist government in
the west, those backed by Qatar and
Turkey. While in Syria, following the
rise to power of Akmad al-Shara, a
former Al-Qaeda-affiliated jihadist, the
Saudis offered billions of dollars worth
of capital for reconstruction, while the
UAE has offered up very little because
of their skepticism over Al-Shara's
jihadist past.
In all of these countries, the Saudis
began pursuing a pragmatic foreign
policy in the 2020s that has been
willing to work together with their
ideological enemies, like political
Islamists, in exchange for stability and
calm, keeping conflicts contained and
countries together. While the Emiratis
have continued a policy of expanding
their influence and power and crushing
political Islamists abroad wherever they
can find them by fueling more secular
separatists across the region in Yemen,
Somalia, Sudan, and Libya, especially if
they could provide the Emiratis access
to ports and resources that their
central governments weren't willing or
able to provide themselves. And the
Saudis reconciled with their old enemies
like Iran, Qatar, and Turkey, while the
Emiratis maintained their
confrontational posture towards them.
Thus, as the 2020s have progressed, the
Saudis have come to change their view on
the UAE from a major ally with shared
enemies and goals to a major source of
destabilization in the Middle East that
is posing a significant threat to the
goals of their Vision 2030 economic
diversification strategy. Yemen and
Sudan in particular, festering wounds of
chaos nearby to Saudi Arabia that have
substantial risks of geopolitical
spillover that the Saudis would very
much like to stabilize no matter who
ends up in power there. While the
Emiratis remain more picky and would
like to see non-Islamists in power and
barring that, they'd rather see outright
state collapse or cleave off
secessionist projects that are more
secular and more amenable to them.
As opposed to the ideological conflict
that drove the Middle East's Cold War in
the 2010s between Saudi Arabia and Iran,
the emerging Cold War between Saudi
Arabia and the UAE in the 2020s is
primarily economic in nature. Right now,
nearly half of the Saudi economy is
still dependent on oil, while the UAE
only relies on oil for about 25% of its
own economy. In order to diversify
further away from oil to secure their
future, the Saudis are rapidly investing
into alternative industries that the
Emiratis have long dominated in their
region. Saudi tourism mega projects like
NEOM, The Line, and the Red Sea project
are all designed to transform the Saudi
kingdom into a global luxury tourism hot
spot, which traditionally has been
dominated in the Middle East by the UAE.
The Saudis' creation of Riyadh Air in
2023 and their multi-billion-dollar
Riyadh Airport expansion is specifically
intended to challenge the regional
airline dominance of UAE-based carriers
like Emirates and Etihad. And the
Saudis' declaration in 2022 that
government contracts would henceforth
only be given to foreign firms who
relocated their regional headquarters to
Saudi territory was an obvious and
direct challenge to Dubai, which for
decades has been the epicenter of
foreign business operations in the
Middle East. In other words, Saudi
Arabia is attempting to directly
challenge the UAE's current regional
dominance in business headquarters,
finance, and tourism. While they're also
trying to challenge Dubai and Abu
Dhabi's positions as the most
significant air logistics links between
Asia, Europe, and Africa [music] with
Riyadh and Jeddah as alternatives. Saudi
Arabia needs to succeed here in order to
guarantee their post-oil future. But to
do so means crowding out the UAE in
their own already successful
diversification away from oil strategy
in the process. And the UAE is
absolutely determined to never allow
that to happen, lest they lose out on
their own post-oil future.
The Emirati leadership, after all, is
well aware that Saudi Arabia is
currently threatening to do to them what
they themselves had previously done to
Bahrain several decades ago. It's hard
to imagine this today, but for most of
the 20th century, it was actually
Bahrain who was the major economic
powerhouse in the Persian Gulf. The
small island kingdom was the first in
the region to discover oil in the early
1930s, which they were able to utilize
to gain an economic head start over
everyone else. Bahrain acutely invested
their oil money to diversify their
economy away from oil into different
sectors like tourism and finance. And by
the 1970s, Bahrain was the undisputed
financial center of the Gulf. But then,
beginning in the early 1990s, the UAE
began increasingly challenging Bahrain's
decades of dominance. They established
finance centers in Dubai with less
regulations and more capital, and began
building ambitious, world-famous,
headline-grabbing mega projects that
cemented the UAE's location on the map
as a luxury tourism hotspot. Places like
the Burj Al Arab, the world's first
seven-star hotel, the Palm Jumeirah,
another reclaimed islands, and the Burj
Khalifa, the world's tallest building.
By the middle of the 1990s, and
certainly by the early 2000s, the UAE
had managed to use this strategy to
eclipse Bahrain in virtually every
sector of the economy, from finance to
tourism. And now, the Saudis are
adopting these exact same strategies
today that the Emiratis had used against
Bahrain 30 years ago. While they're also
increasingly competing in another new
major potential source of
diversification away from oil, too, the
realm of artificial intelligence, or AI.
Both countries in the 2020s have come to
view AI as a possible guarantee of their
post-oil futures. They know how
important the AI race is this decade
between the US and China, and they know
that if they can manage to lock in an
indispensable position within the AI
supply chain to the Americans, they can
also secure a firm American commitment
to defending their national security in
an increasingly uncertain world.
Basically, pulling off something similar
to what Taiwan managed to do in the
semiconductor supply chain by
guaranteeing US military support through
carving out an indispensable niche to
them in the semiconductor manufacturing
process. [music]
Both governments have already pledged
tens of billions of dollars of the
AI-related investments just since 2024,
including through some pretty sketchy
Saudi deals with the Americas. Most
notably, the Wall Street Journal
recently reported just 4 days before
Donald Trump's inauguration in January
of 2026, [music]
the UAE government quietly agreed to
purchase a 49% stake in the Trump
family's then-struggling cryptocurrency
company that had no active products
called World Liberty Financial for $500
million, $187
million of which directly flowed to
entities under the Trump family's
personal ownership, marking the first
time in US history that a foreign
government purchased a major ownership
stake in an incoming president's
company. Then, curiously, just a couple
of months later, the new Trump
administration agreed to allow the UAE
to import 500,000
of Nvidia's most powerful AI chips to
build one of the world's largest AI data
center clusters, ignoring all of the
intelligence community's previous fears
that doing so would allow the UAE to
pass on Nvidia's critical technology to
China. The hope of the UAE, no doubt, is
to try and hook themselves to America's
emerging AI industry as much as possible
over the Saudis through any means
necessary, including through exploiting
what seems to be a pretty open case of
corruption within the current American
government. If they're successful, then
they can guarantee America's military
support in an uncertain future the same
kind of way that Taiwan has. While the
Saudis are pushing ahead for their own
AI industry for the exact same reasons.
Perhaps the biggest point of divergence
between Saudi Arabia and the UAE,
however, have been their radically
different approaches towards Israel.
Historically, both countries, along with
most of the rest of the Arab and Muslim
worlds, refused to normalize their
relations with Israel without a solution
to the Palestinian question that
resulted in a fully independent
Palestinian state. But then, in 2020,
the UAE suddenly decided to abandon this
long unified approach and fully
normalize their own relations with
Israel without any solution to the
question of Palestinian statehood,
undermining the Saudis' own position.
Afterwards, the UAE was able to
successfully mediate for Bahrain,
Morocco, and Sudan normalizing their
relations with Israel as well. Pushing
even further forward, the Emiratis
rapidly increased their security
cooperation and intelligence sharing
with Israel in a relationship that
increasingly became more than just
simple recognition, but a full-blown
alliance. By 2021, the UAE and Israel
were conducting joint naval exercises
together in the Red Sea, and allegedly
even developed a joint listening post
together on the Yemeni islands of
Socotra and Perim in order to maintain
surveillance operations on the Houthis.
Meanwhile, the value of trade between
Israel and the UAE grew exponentially
from only a couple hundred million
dollars a year in 2020 to more than
three billion dollars a year by 2023.
For a few years there, the Israelis
believed that the UAE were going to help
deliver them the greatest prize of all,
normalization with Saudi Arabia without
giving the Palestinians an independent
state. Indeed, by September of 2023, MBS
himself exclaimed during an interview on
Fox News that they were merely weeks
away from finalizing such a deal. But
then instead, a few weeks passed by and
Hamas launched their attack on Israel on
October 7th, kickstarting the series of
wars that have rocked the Middle East
ever since that have pushed the Israelis
and Saudis even further apart and the
Israelis and Emiratis even closer
together. Israel almost overnight
shifted from a status quo power in the
Middle East to a revisionist power,
fitting more in line with the UAE's
historically aggressive foreign policy
posture. The Israelis flattened Gaza and
defanged Hamas, escalated their
operations across the West Bank,
bombarded Lebanon from the air, and
launched a ground invasion that
decapitated Hezbollah's leadership,
repeatedly bombed Syria, destroying the
country's air defenses and contributing
to the Assad regime's collapse before
launching another ground invasion near
the Golan Heights, repeatedly bombed the
Houthis in Yemen, and have launched
repeated waves of massive air strikes
directly against Iran in cooperation
with the Americans, which has resulted
in even more blowback the Saudis didn't
ask for with Iranian drones and missiles
now being fired directly at critical
Saudi oil infrastructure. And nearly all
of these Israeli attacks were also waged
against the UAE's own regional political
Islamist enemies as well. In Syria,
Israel and the UAE both came to support
the secessionist Druze faction that
emerged in the south of the country.
Then in early 2026 in Somalia, Israel
chose to go even further than the UAE
had ever done and became the first UN
member state to formally recognize
Somaliland's independence there. Widely
viewed as a move by the Israelis to
establish a permanent military presence
in Somaliland to maintain a force more
closely located to the Houthis. And a
deal that was likely mediated by the UAE
in order to gain Israel's support for
their port development project at
Berbera.
Shortly before this, MBS was personally
visiting with US President Donald Trump
in Washington at the tail end of 2025,
where he allegedly requested that the US
begin sanctioning the UAE over the
Emirati support of the RSF in Sudan, who
had just perpetrated a massacre of
potentially tens of thousands of
sub-Saharan African people in a matter
of days in the city of El Fasher in
Darfur, and who the US government has
also formally recognized as being guilty
of committing genocide in Darfur.
Possibly in retaliation for this, the
UAE then seemingly gave their backed STC
separatist faction in Yemen the green
light to launch a new offensive against
the Saudi-backed unity government in the
country. Their surprise offensive
rapidly overran the Saudi-backed sides
positions across the east of Yemen,
which led the STC to threaten a formal
declaration of independence and a
subsequent recognition of Israel as an
independent state in a broader
geopolitical coordination with the UAE.
But Saudi Arabia decided to immediately
respond by bombing Emirati weapons
shipments that were going to the STC
directly, and then backed their own
sides counteroffensive with direct air
support against the STC that rapidly
reversed all of the STC's gains and then
resulted in their complete collapse. And
in the process, also resulting in the
complete collapse of the UAE's presence
and influence in Yemen as well.
After Israel recognized Somaliland's
independence with the obvious mediation
of the UAE behind the scenes, Somalia
retaliated with fury by severing all of
their diplomatic relations with the UAE,
expelling the UAE military from the
country, [music] and canceling all of
their previous financial contracts with
the UAE as well. Somalia even went so
far as to call for the Saudis to lead a
military intervention into the country
to help restore the government's lost
authority over Somaliland, something
which the Saudis so far have been
reluctant to do unlike in Yemen. And
most alarmingly of all to the Saudis,
the Israelis were even bold enough to
conduct an air strike in Doha, the
capital city of Qatar, which targeted
Hamas's leadership who were being housed
in a Qatari government residential
complex. [music] That Israeli attack on
the territory of Qatar particularly
shocked the Saudi leadership because it
showed that if the Israelis were willing
to bomb the territory of Qatar, a major
non-NATO ally of the United States, who
also hosts America's biggest military
base in the Middle East, they were
probably willing to bomb the territory
of just about anyone else, too,
including Saudi Arabia. So, while Saudi
Arabia historically viewed the Iranians
as the largest source of destabilization
in the Middle East and the biggest
threat to the stability they required
for the Vision 2030 diversification away
from oil program, they have increasingly
come to view Israel and the UAE as being
the biggest threat to that stability
instead now. With Israel and the UAE
pretty much supporting all of the same
separatist factions in Syria, Yemen, and
Somalia that threaten to tear those
states apart, Israel directly bombing
multiple countries from Lebanon to Syria
to Yemen to Iran and even a Qatar, and
with the UAE fueling the civil war in
Sudan through their support of the RSF
and their attempt to shear off Southern
Yemen, Saudi Arabia also now deeply
fears strategic encirclement new
Israel-UAE axis and fears that together,
the Israelis and the Emiratis are openly
pushing towards full-blown Middle
Eastern hegemony under their own terms
that could directly challenge Saudi
Arabia's capability to successfully
diversify away from oil. Moreover, Saudi
Arabia's capability and willingness to
recognize Israel and join them has
become effectively impossible in the
post-October 7th world. Israel's
obliteration of Gaza and its genocidal
retaliation against the Palestinians
there has nose-dived the public opinion
of Israel all across the Arab and Muslim
worlds. A poll from the Washington
Institute for Near East Policy in August
of 2023 found that 43% of Saudi Arabia's
citizens, at that point before the war
had started, supported normalizing
business and economic ties with the
Israelis. But by December of 2023, just
a few months later, after the war had
started, that ratio had already
plummeted to just 17% instead. While an
overwhelming 96% of Saudi respondents
said that Arab countries should
immediately sever all of their relations
with Israel. MBS knows that with numbers
like that at home, there's no
conceivable way that he can ever lead
Saudi Arabia to recognizing Israel
without generating an existential
internal crisis so severe that it could
threaten his own regime and possibly
even his own life. The UAE has been able
to maintain the relationship with Israel
largely because they have such a
dramatically smaller population. About
90% of the UAE's population are
foreigners these days. And there's only
a little over 1 million actual Emirati
citizens. By contrast, only about 43% of
Saudi Arabia's population are
foreigners. And they have about 20
million Saudi citizens' opinions to
actually worry about. A substantial
number of whom also follow the much more
hardline Wahhabi school of Sunni Islam.
The UAE has a far, far smaller
population of their own citizens who
they must fear by cooperating with
Israel. While Saudi Arabia, with their
control of the two holiest sites of
Islam in Mecca and Medina, must also
take worldwide Muslim opinion into
account for their foreign policy
decisions that the UAE simply doesn't
experience. Moreover, the Saudis have
also basically gotten everything they
would have wanted out of recognizing
Israel without actually having to do it
anyway. During MBS's most recent visit
to the White House in 2025, when he
allegedly asked for American sanctions
on the UAE over what's going on in
Sudan, he also managed to secure the
Trump administration's elevation of
Saudi Arabia to major non-NATO ally
status, the sale of the F-35 fighter jet
to his kingdom, and American
technological assistance with a civilian
nuclear power program. Basically, all of
the things that the previous Biden
administration had been dangling in
front of Saudi Arabia the carrots they'd
give for recognizing Israel. Now that
Trump gave them all of the carrots
without them having to recognize Israel,
on top of the higher reputational and
instability costs that they'd pay for
recognizing Israel now after Gaza's
destruction, why on earth would the
Saudis ever actually do so? They're
simply not going to do it, and there's
basically nothing that can be done to
make them do it now, which is only
further fueling the divergence taking
place between Saudi Arabia and the UAE.
There are effectively two different webs
of alliances in the Middle East and the
periphery that are forming right now.
One being led by Saudi Arabia, and the
other being led by the UAE and Israel.
Shortly after the Israeli airstrike on
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Pakistan agreed
to sign an unprecedented mutual defense
pact that's similar to NATO, pledging
each other to the other's military
defense if they are attacked by someone
else, and which might also, at least in
theory, place Saudi Arabia under
Pakistan's nuclear weapons umbrella.
Saudi Arabia and Pakistan have also both
recently confirmed that they are
actively in discussions to add Turkey
into this mutual defense pact as well,
who have their own concerns about the
ascendance of Israel and the UAE in the
region, in an emerging defense pact that
some analysts are calling the Islamic
NATO. Qatar, long a promoter of
political Islam and a key ally of
Erdogan's Turkey in that project, is
also going to be a presumable member of
the Saudi led camp now. Along with
El-Sisi's Egypt, largely due to the UAE
support of the RSF in Sudan, and their
support of Abiy Ahmed's Ethiopia and his
mega dam on the Nile, that threatens
their water source. On the other side
are the UAE and Israel, along with other
Muslim countries who have joined the
Abraham Accords and recognized Israel,
like Bahrain and Morocco, and other
peripheral non-Muslim countries like
Cyprus, Greece, and India. Greece and
Cyprus, largely over their conflict with
Turkey, that alliance with Israel now,
and India, over their eternal conflict
with Pakistan and their outrage at the
Pakistan-Saudi mutual defense pact.
Between them are a variety of
battleground states in which they are
all increasingly competing for
influence, with the Saudi-led side
largely supporting central governments
trying to keep the country's recognized
borders together, [music] and the
UAE-Israel side largely supporting
separatists or militias fighting against
those central governments trying to tear
the countries apart. From Syria to Yemen
to Somalia to Sudan.
Without the glue of their greater mutual
Iranian enemy holding them together any
longer, this new emerging rivalry across
the Middle East is what will inevitably
rush in to fill the vacuum. For the
United States and Israel, they may very
well be successful at toppling the
Iranian regime during this latest war,
or at least severely degrade Iran's
power projection capabilities. But in
the process, it will give rise to this
new problem for both of them to manage.
And Washington's core strategic
challenge in the Middle East will
inevitably shift from containing Iran to
containing this new
Saudi-Emirati-Israeli
rivalry instead. If left unchecked for
too long, the United States might
eventually have to take a firm side
between the UAE and Saudi Arabia if the
rivalry between them becomes truly
irreconcilable. [music] And that could
become an impossibly difficult choice to
make between Saudi Arabia's oil might
and religious legitimacy, Qatar's LNG
might and its hosting of the largest US
military base in the region, and
Turkey's invaluable position in NATO,
and the UAE's increasing influence over
the AI industry and their economic
might, and America's historically close
relationship to Israel.
Meanwhile, in the United States, one of
the most concerning things about living
here is that there are pretty weak data
privacy laws and a ton of personal data
that gets put out into the public
record, frequently by local, state, and
federal governments themselves. It's
actually always been like that here, and
it wasn't really a huge problem before
the advent of the internet. But these
days, it means that people are able to
turn a profit off of making it easier
for other people to get your personal
information, and they do. They're called
people sites, and if you want to see for
yourself, just search your name and
address or phone number, and you'll
probably come across a bunch of these
sites that list at least some of your
personal information. But you also have
the power to change this. You have the
legal right to request that your
personal data is removed from each and
every one of these sites. The biggest
problem is that it takes forever to
actually do that. They make it as hard
as possible, and you have to do it
individually over and over again for
every single one of the endless sites
that have it. But that's a problem that
this video's sponsor, Incogni, fixes.
They'll do this entire process for you
on your behalf. They constantly search
through the internet for any of your
personal data that's out there, and
they'll go through the whole process of
taking it all down, including handling
any and all rejections. Letting Incogni
handle all of this is not only great for
peace of mind, but it can also really
help cut down on obnoxious spam calls
and emails, since it's these very same
services that sell your data in bulk.
I've been an actual customer of Incogni
for years now, so I know that it really
works, and I found the cost to be very
[music] well worth it. And it'll be even
more worth it for you, because Incogni
is offering you 60% off of their annual
plan when you click the button here on
your screen right now, or go to
incogni.com/reallifelore,
or follow the link that's down below the
description, and use code reallifelore.
It's a great way to help support my
channel and the journalism that I'm
trying to do here as well. And as
always, thank you so much for watching.